= ITE-2: Using TUF and in-toto to build compromise-resilient CI/CD
:source-highlighter: pygments
:toc: preamble
:toclevels: 4
ifdef::env-github[]
:tip-caption: :bulb:
:note-caption: :information_source:
:important-caption: :heavy_exclamation_mark:
:caution-caption: :fire:
:warning-caption: :warning:
endif::[]

.Metadata
[cols="2"]
|===
| ITE
| 2

| Title
| in-toto Enhancement format

| Sponsor
| link:https://github.com/trishankatdatadog[Trishank Karthik Kuppusamy]

| Status
| Draft :pensive:

| Type
| Process

| Created
| 2019-07-15

|===

[[abstract]]
== Abstract

We discuss a standard for using The Update Framework (TUF) as a
higher-level protocol for securely distributing in-toto layout and link
metadata as well as the software packages described in the in-toto
metadata. Assuming that critical signing keys are kept offline from the
CI/CD pipeline, combining TUF with in-toto provides the pipeline with a
desirable property called _compromise-resilience_: that is, even if the
pipeline is compromised anywhere between developers and end-users, then
attackers should not be able to cause end-users to install malicious
versions of packages that were never released by developers.

[[motivation]]
== Motivation

Whereas in-toto provides end-to-end verification of a software supply
chain, it does not solve a crucial problem that arises in practice: how
to securely distribute, revoke, and replace the public keys used to
verify the in-toto layout. This mechanism must be
_compromise-resilient_, and resistant to a compromise of the software
repository or server used to serve files. While SSL / TLS protects users
from man-in-the-middle (MitM) attacks, it is not compromise-resilient,
because attackers who compromise the repository can simply switch the
public keys used to verify in-toto layout undetected, and thus defeat
end-to-end verification. Likewise, other solutions, such as X.509
certificates do not support necessary features such as in-band key
revocation and key rotation.

TUF provides precisely this type of compromise-resilient mechanism, as
well as in-band key revocation and key rotation. To do so, TUF adds a
higher layer of signed metadata to the repository carefully designed to
follow several design principles. These principles, two of which are
discussed here, also inspired the in-toto design. The first is the use
of roles in a similar fashion to in-toto, so that a key compromise does
not necessarily affect all targets (i.e., any Python wheels, or even
in-toto metadata). The second principle is minimizing the risk of a key
compromise using offline keys, or signing keys that are kept off the
repository and pipeline in a cold storage mechanism, such as safe
deposit boxes, so that attackers who compromise the infrastructure are
unable to find these keys.

We use TUF to distribute several artifacts in a compromise-resilient
manner:

[arabic]
. The root of trust for all packages as well as TUF and in-toto
metadata.
. The software supply chain defined using in-toto.
. The public keys used to verify this supply chain.

TUF also guarantees that MitM attackers cannot tamper with the
consistency, authenticity, and integrity of these files, nor rollback or
indefinitely replay metadata. The key point is that this offline
bootstrapping of trust with TUF is what gives in-toto meaningful
security guarantees.

== Specification

=== Glossary

Please consult Sections 1-2 of the TUF and in-toto specifications
respectively.

The keywords MUST, MUST NOT, REQUIRED, SHALL, SHALL NOT, SHOULD, SHOULD
NOT, RECOMMENDED, MAY, and OPTIONAL in this document are to be
interpreted as described in https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119[RFC
2119].

[[security-models]]
=== Security models

Neither in-toto or TUF themselves mandate the security models required
to work. That is, it is possible for a deployment to use only online
keys and a single online-signed layout to secure their supply chain.
However, such a deployment will have marginal security benefits. In
contrast, the security models proposed below aim to provide strong
security guarantees in the event of infrastructure compromise,
misbehaving functionaries, and even project owners, while maintaining
reasonable operational overhead for most cases.

This section discusses how the reader SHOULD combine TUF and in-toto in
order to build-compromise resilience. Two examples are presented: a
minimum viable product (MVP), and a running example using Datadog Agent
integrations. The reader is assumed to be familiar with the concepts and
terminology of public-key cryptography as well as to have thoroughly
read and understood the
https://github.com/theupdateframework/specification[TUF] and
https://github.com/in-toto/docs[in-toto] specifications. Finally, the
reader is also assumed to have access to implementations of TUF (e.g.,
for https://github.com/theupdateframework/tuf[Python],
https://github.com/theupdateframework/notary[Docker],
https://github.com/flynn/go-tuf[Go], and
https://github.com/heartsucker/rust-tuf[Rust]) and in-toto (e.g., for
https://github.com/in-toto/in-toto[Python],
https://github.com/in-toto/in-toto-java[Java], and
https://github.com/in-toto/in-toto-golang[Go]) that are capable of
meeting the following requirements.

[[basic-security-model]]
==== Basic security model

This subsection describes the requirements that MUST be met in order for
an integration of TUF and in-toto to be said to be compromise-resilient.

The in-toto root layout MUST consist of at least two steps:

[arabic]
. The "`developer`" step corresponds to a developer who signs source
code. Typically, it receives no materials, and outputs source code as
products. Its link metadata MUST be signed by developers using (m, n)
offline keys, where m >= 1, and n is the number of currently trusted
developers. It is OPTIONAL but RECOMMENDED to protect these keys using
hardware such as https://github.com/DataDog/yubikey[YubiKeys].
. The "`packager`" step corresponds to the CI/CD pipeline which
transforms this source code into packages (e.g., tarballs, binaries).
Typically, it receives source code from the "`developer`" step, and
outputs packages as products. It SHOULD use (1, 1) online keys.

The in-toto root layout itself MUST be signed by administrators using
(m, n) offline keys, where n >= 2, and m >= ceiling(n / 2). This means
that administrators are responsible for distributing, revoking, and
rotating developer keys corresponding to the first step. Alternatively,
administrators MAY use a
https://github.com/in-toto/docs/blob/master/in-toto-spec.md#214-third-party-sublayouts[sublayout]
to outsource this responsibility. In that case, the functionary who
signs the sublayout MUST use the same (m, n) threshold of offline keys.
The root layout and sublayout, if any, SHOULD expire in 1 year.

image:tuf-in-toto-figure-1.png[Figure 1]

*Figure 1*: An illustration of a minimum TUF security model that
provides compromise-resilience.

The TUF security model, illustrated in Figure 1, MUST be configured as
follows, which we discuss using an ``inside-out'', layered approach.

The delegated "`package-and-in-toto-metadata-signer`" targets metadata
role signs targets metadata about the latest available packages. Besides
cryptographic hashes and file sizes, each package listed in the targets
metadata is also associated with custom targets metadata: specifically,
the _complete_ set of in-toto metadata associated with the production of
that particular package. In our basic security model, this means: (1)
the in-toto root layout metadata file, (2) the "`developer`" step link
metadata file, and (3) the ``package'' step link metadata file. There
are three important considerations regarding the targets metadata signed
by this role:

[arabic]
. Since each package is typically produced independently of other
packages, this means that the complete set of in-toto _link_ metadata
for a package SHOULD be different, and therefore isolated, from that for
another package. (The in-toto root layout metadata SHOULD be the same
for every package.) This MAY be done in a number of different ways, but
perhaps the simplest is to use directories with unique names to isolate
different in-toto link metadata for different packages, where the name
MAY be the SHA-256 hash of the "`developer`" step link metadata file for
a particular package.
. The targets metadata MUST also list the targets metadata of all
in-toto link metadata files associated with all available packages. Note
that as the number of packages grows, so will the size of this metadata
file. Bandwidth considerations will be discussed in the next subsection.
. Since packages can be added on demand, this role SHOULD use (1, 1)
online keys, and its metadata SHOULD expire in 1 day.

See Table 1 for an example of a complete set of targets metadata for a
particular package signed by this role.

image:tuf-in-toto-table-1.png[Table 1]

*Table 1*: An example of the targets metadata for a package signed by
the "`package-and-in-toto-metadata-signer`" role.

The targets role signs targets metadata about the in-toto root layout,
and all of the public keys used to verify the layout itself. Finally, it
makes a terminating delegation of all packages ("*``) to the
â€œpackage-and-in-toto-metadata-signer'' role. It MUST use a different set
of (m, n) offline keys from the root role, where n >= 2, and m >=
ceiling(n / 2), and its metadata SHOULD expire in 1 year. See Table 2
for an example.

image:tuf-in-toto-table-2.png[Table 2]

*Table 2*: An example of the delegations and targets signed by the
targets role. Note that it lists the in-toto root layout, and all of the
public keys used to verify the layout itself.

The snapshot and timestamp roles SHOULD use (1, 1) online keys, and
their metadata SHOULD expire in 1 day. The in-toto "`packager`"
functionary as well as the TUF timestamp, snapshot, and
"`package-and-in-toto-metadata-signer`" roles MAY share the same (1, 1)
online keys. Furthermore, these online TUF roles MAY share the same
metadata expiration period (e.g., 1 day). Online keys are used so that
robots can use the key to sign new metadata on demand. When the in-toto
or TUF implementation supports it, it is RECOMMENDED that online keys
are protected from being exfiltrated using a Hardware Security Module
(HSM).

Finally, the root role MUST use a different set of (m, n) offline keys
from both the in-toto root layout and the targets role, where n >= 2,
and m >= ceiling(n / 2). Its metadata SHOULD expire in 1 year. All TUF
metadata and targets MUST be written using
https://github.com/theupdateframework/specification/blob/master/tuf-spec.md#7-consistent-snapshots[consistent
snapshots], which is set using the root metadata, so that the repository
is able to concurrently write new files while package managers are
reading old ones, and also rotate package managers from old root
metadata to the latest one. Table 3 summarizes the security model
discussed in this subsection.

image:tuf-in-toto-table-3.png[Table 3]

*Table 3*: A summary of the security model discussed in this subsection.

[[datadog-agent-integrations]]
==== Real-world example: Datadog Agent integrations

Datadog is a monitoring service for cloud-scale applications, providing
monitoring of servers, databases, tools, and services, through a
software-as-a-service-based data analytics platform. It supports
multiple cloud service providers, including Amazon Web Services,
Microsoft Azure, Google Cloud Platform, and Red Hat OpenShift. At the
time of writing, it has over 8,000 customers, and collects trillions of
monitoring record points per day.

The Datadog https://docs.datadoghq.com/agent/?tab=agentv6[agent] is
software that runs on hosts. It collects events and metrics from hosts
and sends them to Datadog, where customers can analyze their monitoring
and performance data. The agent
https://docs.datadoghq.com/getting_started/integrations/[integrations]
are plug-ins that collect metrics from services running on customer
infrastructure. Presently, there are more than one hundred integrations
that come installed out-of-the-box with the Agent.

This subsection discusses the TUF security model used to distribute the
Datadog Agent integrations in a compromise-resilient manner.

image:tuf-in-toto-figure-2.png[Figure 2]

*Figure 2*: The Datadog Agent integrations software supply chain.

The Datadog agent integrations supply chain, shown in Figure 2,
presently has three steps:

[arabic]
. The first "`tag`" step outputs Python source code as products. Every
integration consists of Python source code and several
https://yaml.org/[YAML] configuration files. The step uses (1, n)
Yubikeys, where n is the current number of Datadog Agent integrations
developers, and this is an
https://dd-integrations-core-wheels-build-stable.datadoghq.com/targets/in-toto-metadata/3e592d47ab815cb9bd8aa064bbaa2a217c1baa9a55a7f8b73d2da6dfd14a247e/tag.c295cf63.link[example]
of "`tag`" link metadata file.
. In the second "`wheels-builder`" step, the pipeline must receive the
same source code from the "`tag`" step and produce a Python
https://pythonwheels.com/[wheel], as well as its updated Python metadata
(https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0503/[simple indices]). Each wheel
is a ZIP file and its metadata is an HTML file that points to all the
available _versions_ of an integration. This step uses (1,1) online
keys, and this is an
https://dd-integrations-core-wheels-build-stable.datadoghq.com/targets/in-toto-metadata/3e592d47ab815cb9bd8aa064bbaa2a217c1baa9a55a7f8b73d2da6dfd14a247e/wheels-builder.9fc6e62d.link[example]
of the "`wheels-builder`" link metadata file.
. In the third "`wheels-signer`" step, the pipeline must receive, as
materials, the same products as the "`wheels-builder`" step. This steps
signs for all wheels using the TUF security model described shortly. It
can be dangerous packaging Python source code, because arbitrary code
can be executed during the packaging process, which can be inserted by
compromising the GitHub
https://github.com/DataDog/integrations-core[repository]. Therefore,
this step is separate from the "`wheels-builder`" step, so that a
compromise of the former does not yield the signing keys of this step.
This step uses (1, 1) online keys, and this is an
https://dd-integrations-core-wheels-build-stable.datadoghq.com/targets/in-toto-metadata/3e592d47ab815cb9bd8aa064bbaa2a217c1baa9a55a7f8b73d2da6dfd14a247e/wheels-signer.20585de1.link[example]
of the "`wheels-signer`" link metadata file.

Finally, there is an inspection which first ensures that a given wheel
matches the materials of the "`wheels-signer`" step. It then extracts
files from the wheel and checks that they correspond to exactly the same
Python source code and YAML configuration files as the products of the
"`tag`" step. Thus, this layout provides end-to-end verification: it
prevents a compromised pipeline from causing users to trust wheels with
source code that was never released by Datadog developers. This is an
https://dd-integrations-core-wheels-build-stable.datadoghq.com/targets/in-toto-metadata/root.layout[example]
of the
https://dd-integrations-core-wheels-build-stable.datadoghq.com/targets/in-toto-metadata/root.layout[root
layout] metadata file, which is signed using (2, 3) offline keys, and
expires in 1 year. (The layout also tracks previously built Python
metadata and wheels as well as their corresponding in-toto link metadata
files as they move through the CI/CD pipeline, but they are largely out
of the scope of this document.)

image:tuf-in-toto-figure-3.png[Figure 3]

*Figure 3*: The TUF security model that distributes in-toto metadata and
Datadog Agent integrations in a compromise-resilient manner.

The TUF security model, illustrated in Figure 3, is configured as
follows, which we discuss using an ``inside-out'', layered approach. A
key difference from the <<<basic-security-model, basic security model>>>
is that we use delegations extensively in order to split metadata
bandwidth costs.

The "`wheels-signer`" delegated targets role makes a terminating
delegation of all Python metadata and wheels for integrations beginning
with the letter ``a'' to the ``wheels-signer-a'' role, all Python
metadata and wheels for integrations beginning with the letter ``b'' to
the ``wheels-signer-b'' role, and so on until all Python metadata and
wheels for integrations beginning with the letter ``z'' to the
``wheels-signer-z'' role. Thus, there are 26 of these roles. This role
uses (2, 3) offline keys, does not directly sign for any Python metadata
or wheel, and its metadata expires in 1 year. This is an
https://dd-integrations-core-wheels-build-stable.datadoghq.com/metadata.staged/wheels-signer.json[example]
of its metadata file (see Table 4).

image:tuf-in-toto-table-4.png[Table 4]

*Table 4*: An example of the delegations signed by the "`wheels-signer`"
role.

Each "`wheels-signer-[a-z]`" role signs targets metadata about a certain
subset of Python metadata and wheels beginning with a particular letter.
Each Python wheel is associated with custom targets metadata that point
to all of the in-toto metadata required to verify that particular wheel,
as described in the <<<basic-security-model, basic security model>>>.
In particular, each directory containing in-toto link metadata
for one or more associated wheels is named directly using the SHA-256
hexadecimal digest of the "`tag`" link metadata file associated with
these wheels. Each role uses (1,1) online keys, does not delegate any
Python metadata or wheel, and its metadata expires in 1 week. This is an
https://dd-integrations-core-wheels-build-stable.datadoghq.com/metadata.staged/wheels-signer-a.json[example]
of the ``wheels-signer-a'' metadata file (see Table 5).

image:tuf-in-toto-table-5.png[Table 5]

*Table 5*: An example of the targets signed by the ``wheels-signer-a''
role.

The ``in-toto-metadata-signer'' delegated targets role makes a
terminating delegation of all in-toto link metadata in directories
beginning with the letter ``0'' to the ``in-toto-metadata-signer-0''
role, all in-toto link metadata in directories beginning with the letter
``1'' to the ``in-toto-metadata-signer-1'' role, and so on until all
in-toto link metadata in directories beginning with the letter ``f'' to
the ``in-toto-metadata-signer-f'' role. Thus, there are 16 of these
roles (since there are 16 hexadecimal characters in the SHA-256 digests
used to uniquely name these directories). This role uses (2, 3) offline
keys, does not directly sign for any in-toto link metadata file, and its
metadata expires in 1 year. This is an
https://dd-integrations-core-wheels-build-stable.datadoghq.com/metadata.staged/in-toto-metadata-signer.json[example]
of its metadata file (see Table 6).

image:tuf-in-toto-table-6.png[Table 6]

*Table 6*: An example of the delegations signed by the
``in-toto-metadata-signer'' role.

Each ``in-toto-metadata-singer-[0-f]'' role signs targets metadata about
a certain subset of in-toto-link metadata files inside directories
beginning with a particular letter. Each role uses (1,1) online keys,
does not delegate any in-toto link metadata file, and its metadata
expires in 1 week. This is an
https://dd-integrations-core-wheels-build-stable.datadoghq.com/metadata.staged/in-toto-metadata-signer-3.json[example]
of the ``in-toto-metadata-signer-3'' metadata file (see Table 7).

image:tuf-in-toto-table-7.png[Table 7]

*Table 7*: An example of the targets signed by the
``in-toto-metadata-signer-3'' role.

The targets role signs targets metadata about the in-toto root layout,
and all of the public keys used to verify the layout itself. It also
makes a terminating delegation of all Python metadata and wheels to the
"`wheels-signer`" role. Finally, it makes a terminating delegation of
all in-toto link metadata to the ``in-toto-metadata-signer'' role. It
uses a different set of (2, 3) offline keys from the in-toto root
layout, and its metadata expires in 1 year, too. However, it does share
its keys with the "`wheels-signer`" and ``in-toto-metadata-signer''
roles. This is an
https://dd-integrations-core-wheels-build-stable.datadoghq.com/metadata.staged/targets.json[example]
of the targets metadata file (see Table 8).

image:tuf-in-toto-table-8.png[Table 8]

*Table 8*: An example of the delegations and targets signed by the
targets role.

All online roles ("`wheels-signer-[a-z]`",
"`in-toto-metadata-signer-[0-f]`", snapshot, and timestamp) share the
same (1, 1) online keys. This is an example of the
https://dd-integrations-core-wheels-build-stable.datadoghq.com/metadata.staged/snapshot.json[snapshot]
metadata file, and this is an example the
https://dd-integrations-core-wheels-build-stable.datadoghq.com/metadata.staged/timestamp.json[timestamp]
metadata file.

The root role uses a different set (2, 3) offline keys from both the
in-toto root layout and the targets role, and its metadata expires in 1
year. This is an
https://dd-integrations-core-wheels-build-stable.datadoghq.com/metadata.staged/root.json[example]
the root metadata file. All TUF metadata and targets are written using
https://github.com/theupdateframework/specification/blob/master/tuf-spec.md#7-consistent-snapshots[consistent
snapshots]. Table 9 summarizes the security model discussed in this
subsection.

image:tuf-in-toto-table-9.png[Table 9]

*Table 9*: A summary of the security model discussed in this subsection.

In summary, the Datadog pipeline uses TUF to appropriately bootstrap the
root of the trust for the entire system, and in-toto to guarantee that
the pipeline packaged exactly the source code signed by one of the
Datadog developers inside universal Python wheels. By tightly
integrating TUF and in-toto, Datadogâ€™s users obtain the
compromise-resilience of both systems combined.

[[workflows]]
=== Workflows

This subsection discusses the workflow that Datadog developers, CI/CD
pipeline, and end-users follow.

==== Developer

Datadog developers sign integrations using Yubikeys, which are trusted,
and support the on-card generation and storage of GPG signing keys.

There are three levels of protection on these keys:

[arabic]
. Assuming that the Yubikey firmware works correctly, private keys
cannot be exported outside of the card.
. Each Yubikey requires a secret user PIN to unlock the signing key.
. Every developer must touch the Yubikey to authorize any signing
operation.

The developers use a command-line tool which transparently
https://github.com/DataDog/integrations-core/blob/master/datadog_checks_dev/datadog_checks/dev/tooling/signing.py[calls]
in-toto, which in turn calls GPG, to sign integrations. Thus, using
Yubikeys, we are able to significantly minimize the risk of a key
compromise without hampering usability.

==== CI/CD

When developers merge source code for new and / or updated integrations
into the GitHub
https://github.com/DataDog/integrations-core[repository], the internal
CI/CD pipeline is triggered, which consists of the following steps:

[arabic]
. Fetch source code from the GitHub repository corresponding to these
integrations. Also fetch previously built Python metadata and wheels.
. Record this source code and previously built Python metadata and
wheels as materials for the "`wheels-builder`" step. Build Python
metadata and wheels for these integrations. Record all old and new
Python metadata and wheels as products of the "`wheels-builder`" step.
. Fetch previously signed TUF and in-toto metadata.
. Record all old and new Python metadata and wheels as materials for the
"`wheels-signer`" step. Verify all previously signed TUF and in-toto
metadata as well as previously built Python metadata and wheels. Produce
a new consistent snapshot of TUF metadata for all Python metadata and
wheels as well as in-toto link metadata. Record no products for the the
"`wheels-signer`" step.
. Test that the Datadog agent is able to download and verify with TUF
and in-toto, as described in the next subsection, the latest wheel for
every integration.
. Perform garbage collection of expired consistent snapshots of TUF
metadata.
. Upload the latest consistent snapshot of TUF metadata, new Python
metadata as well as wheels, and new in-toto link metadata to the
repository.

==== End-users

Finally, to install or update integrations, customers use the Datadog
agent, which transparently
https://github.com/DataDog/integrations-core/tree/master/datadog_checks_downloader[calls]
TUF and in-toto libraries on their behalf. The download and verification
workflow is roughly as follows:

[arabic]
. Use TUF to download and verify the wheel for a given integration name
and version number.
. Use TUF to download and verify the in-toto metadata for the given
wheel.
. Use TUF to download and verify public keys for the in-toto root
layout.
. Use in-toto to verify that the given wheel matches the rules specified
in the in-toto root layout.
. If all of the above checks pass, return the wheel to the Datadog
agent.

Customers see no difference in their experience, except if an attack is
caught by TUF or in-toto. In that case, installation of the integration
will be denied, and users will see an error message indicating why TUF
or in-toto failed to verify the installation.

=== Deployment considerations

Deployment considerations, such as designing and securely performing the
offline key generation and rotation ceremony, are discussed in a
separate document.

[[backwards-compatibility]]
== Backwards compatibility

The changes discussed here require considering _at least_ the following
issues of backwards compatibility:

* *If previous package managers already use in-toto but not TUF, then
the filesystem structure for in-toto metadata and packages should be
preserved for package managers that have not yet been updated to use
TUF.* These package managers should be updated to newer versions which
use both TUF and in-toto.
* *When rotating TUF root keys, all versions of the root TUF metadata
from version 1 to N, where N is the latest version, should be preserved
so that package managers can update from one version to the next.* This
assumes that any version N+1 is signed by at least a threshold of root
keys listed in version N.
* *Package managers should use
https://github.com/theupdateframework/taps/blob/master/tap6.md[TAP **6]*
to determine how to respond when a TUF repository has significantly
updated its specification version.**
* *Neither a TUF nor in-toto implementation should make
backward-incompatible changes to how signatures are generated, so that
previous package managers are able to continue to install new packages.*
Note that TUF can otherwise be used to safely rotate the keys for the
entire system, including those using different key types, key sizes,
signature schemes, and cryptographic hashes.

[[security]]
== Security

The exact security guarantees delivered by a TUF and in-toto security
model depends on the specifics of the model, but we can discuss the
guarantees delivered by the models discussed above.

We assume that an attacker can:

[arabic]
. Compromise any part of the infrastructure between, but not including,
developers and end-users. Thus, attackers can tamper with any files and
keys stored on the infrastructure, including those situations where the
key itself is unknown (e.g., due to hardware protection), but where the
attacker is nevertheless able to sign malicious packages using the key.
. Respond to user requests. This can be done either by acting as a
man-in-the-middle, or compromising the infrastructure as above.

We assume that attackers cannot access or reverse-engineer offline keys,
which are protected using hardware and / or operations security.
Weaknesses in implementations of cryptography are outside the scope of
this document, although implementers may be able to hedge their bets by
using a diversity of cryptographic hashing and signing algorithms.

An attack will be successful if the attacker can change the contents of
a package that a user installs (e.g., to insert a backdoor).

=== Basic security model

Table 10 presents a detailed security analysis for the
<<<basic-security-model, basic security model>>>, featuring only the
most significant security attacks.

image:tuf-in-toto-table-10.png[Table 10]

*Table 10*: A security analysis showing which security attacks are
possible for the basic security model, depending on which in-toto
functionary or TUF role keys are compromised. in-toto functionaries and
TUF roles are listed as rows in increasing order of difficulty to
compromise. Security attacks are listed as columns in increasing order
of severity. The result of combining two or more functionaries / roles
is that "`Yes`" overrides "`No`" or ``N/A''.

=== Real-world example: Datadog Agent integrations

Table 11 presents a detailed security analysis for
<<datadog-agent-integrations, Datadog agent integrations>>, featuring
only the most significant security attacks.

image:tuf-in-toto-table-11.png[Table 11]

*Table 11*: A security analysis showing which security attacks are
possible for Datadog agent integrations, depending on which in-toto
functionary or TUF role keys are compromised. in-toto functionaries and
TUF roles are listed as rows in increasing order of difficulty to
compromise. Security attacks are listed as columns in increasing order
of severity. The result of combining two or more functionaries / roles
is that "`Yes`" overrides "`No`" or ``N/A''.

[[testing]]
== Testing

N/A.

[[infrastructure-requirements]]
== Infrastructure requirements

The changes discussed here require adding _at least_ the following
infrastructure and resources:

* *An offline key ceremony to generate and rotate all private and public
keys for TUF and in-toto.* Operations security (OPSEC) is extremely
important here to ensure that offline private keys are not leaked or
exported by accident. Enough backups should also be made to ensure that
the keys for the entire system can be rotated when necessary, such as
removing or adding developer keys, which is an additional cost.
* *Provisioning developers with signing keys (possibly with GPG on
Yubikeys as discussed below) and developer tools with which they can
sign their own code.* Costs include ease-of-use, and protecting keys
from being exfiltrated, possibly using HSMs.
* *Instrumenting every step in the CI/CD pipeline to generate signed
in-toto metadata.* Costs include protecting keys from being exfiltrated,
possibly using HSMs.
* *Adding or instrumenting a last step in the CI/CD pipeline to bundle
and sign using TUF all in-toto metadata and packages.* There should be a
scheduled task that automatically runs at fixed intervals in order to
renew signatures and prevent expiration of TUF metadata.
* *Instrumenting package managers to download and verify metadata using
TUF and in-toto before installing new code.*
* *Time to test the entire pipeline end-to-end between developers and
end-users, and providing support for unforeseen issues.* Costs include
updating the package managers in order to fix these issues.

[[references]]
== References

[arabic]
. https://ssl.engineering.nyu.edu/papers/samuel_tuf_ccs_2010.pdf[Survivable
Key Compromise in Software Update Systems]
. https://github.com/theupdateframework/specification/blob/master/tuf-spec.md[The
Update Framework Specification]
. https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0458/[PEP 458 â€“ Surviving a
Compromise of PyPI]
. https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0480/[PEP 480 â€“ Surviving a
Compromise of PyPI: The Maximum Security Model]
. https://www.usenix.org/node/194973[Diplomat: Using Delegations to
Protect Community Repositories]
. https://www.usenix.org/conference/atc17/technical-sessions/presentation/kuppusamy[Mercury:
Bandwidth-Effective Prevention of Rollback Attacks Against Community
Repositories]
. https://ssl.engineering.nyu.edu/papers/kuppusamy_escar_16.pdf[Securing
Software Updates for Automobiles]
. https://uptane.github.io/uptane-standard/uptane-standard.html[Uptane
IEEE-ISTO Standard for Design and Implementation]
. https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity19/presentation/torres-arias[in-toto:
providing farm-to-table security properties for bits and bytes]
. https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/engineering/secure-publication-of-datadog-agent-integrations-with-tuf-and-in-toto/[Secure
Publication of Datadog Agent Integrations with TUF and in-toto]
. https://youtu.be/XAlvd4QXngs[Deep Dive: TUF at Kubecon North America
2018]
